
Page: 1
(No input provided)

Page: 2
Introductory Guidance Note and Checklists

If you intend to rent a home to or from someone, you should have a written tenancy agreement. To help tenants and landlords, the Government has produced this model tenancy agreement, which can be used free of charge. No fee may be charged by anyone for its use.

If you are considering using this agreement, it is very important that you first read this introductory guidance note.

4.1. Why has the Government produced this model agreement?

This model tenancy agreement has been developed by the Government to produce an agreement that strikes a fair balance between the interests of landlords and tenants. There is no legal requirement to use this particular agreement.

This agreement has been designed for those wanting the stability of a longer tenancy. However, the Government recognizes that the circumstances of either the tenant or the landlord may change during the tenancy, which is why, if the agreement is for two years or more, either the landlord or the tenant can bring it to an end earlier, where certain conditions apply (see the break clauses in section F).

4.2 Can this agreement be used if we want to enter into an agreement for a fixed term of less than two years?

Whilst this agreement has been developed with longer tenancies in mind, it can be adapted for shorter agreements under the existing Assured Shorthold Tenancy model. If you only wish to have a fixed-term period of, say, six or 18 months, then you should fix the rent for the whole period (see clause B6) and can ignore the break clauses in section F of this agreement, as they have been drafted so that they only apply to tenancies of two years or more. The agreement can then be renewed at the end of that period, if the parties so wish, or the tenancy can simply run on from month to month until terminated.

4.3. When shouldn't this agreement be used?

The model agreement is intended for use when a private landlord and tenant enter into a fixed-term assured shorthold tenancy for a privately rented property in England (this is currently the standard type of tenancy in the private rented sector). It should not be used in the following situations:

Page: 3
Here is the corrected text:

Social housing (local authority or housing association properties);
Business lets (i.e., where the tenant is a company renting residential accommodation for its employees);

Holiday homes;
If none of the tenants will occupy the property as their only or principal home;
Renting a room in shared premises, such as a bedsit (i.e., if the tenants are not, together, renting the whole of a house or a self-contained apartment within a block of flats);
Lodger living in the landlord's own home,

Commercial properties (shops, offices, etc.).

4.4 What should we do before signing this agreement?

Before agreeing to let their property, landlords will want to confirm their prospective tenant's identity, credit history, and possibly employment. Landlords must also check that all people aged 18 and over are living in the property as their only or main home, whether they're named in the tenancy agreement or not, have the right to rent property in the UK (see https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/tenderlords-immigration-right-to-rent-checks).

Further guidance is available at the Government's How to Rent guide, which is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/how-to-rent and the Government's How to Let guide, which is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/how-to-let/

Before signing this agreement, you should take the time to read through it thoroughly and to satisfy yourself that you understand and are happy with the content. If you have any concerns, then you should ask questions of the person you are signing the agreement with or seek independent legal advice from another person or Citizens Advice.

There are also certain clauses in this model tenancy agreement that need to be agreed specifically between the parties (e.g., the rent and length of the agreement) and the necessary information filled in.

On the next two pages of this introductory guidance note, you will find some checklists to help you check that you have filled in all of the relevant parts of the agreement and space which you can use for making a note of key dates during the tenancy.

The checklists are intended to help both landlords and tenants comply with their respective obligations and to ensure that they have read through and filled in all the necessary information before signing the agreement. They do not form part of the legal terms of the agreement. Landlords and tenants can use the 'key dates to remember section below to make a note of any key dates which they may need to remember during the lifetime of the tenancy.
